docs/API_SPEC.md, before:

# Fit Coach API Spec (MVP)

This spec is the canonical definition of the MVP API. Code must match this document.

Base URL: `/`

## Security
- Protected routes: all under `/api/*` require header `X-Api-Key: <secret>`.
- Public routes: `/health`, `/docs`, `/docs/*`.
- Error codes:
  - 401 Unauthorized — header `X-Api-Key` отсутствует
  - 403 Forbidden — ключ передан, но неверный

Swagger (OpenAPI) additions:
```yaml
components:
  securitySchemes:
    ApiKeyAuth:
      type: apiKey
      in: header
      name: X-Api-Key
```
Protected endpoints should declare:
```yaml
security:
  - ApiKeyAuth: []
```

## 1. Health
- GET `/health`
- Response 200: `{ "status": "ok" }`

## 2. Users

### 2.1 Create/Upsert User
- POST `/api/user`
- Request body (Zod):
```ts
{
  provider: string(min:1),
  providerUserId: string(min:1),
  username?: string,
  firstName?: string,
  lastName?: string,
  languageCode?: string,
}
```
- Responses:
  - 200 `{ data: { id: string } }`
  - 400 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 401 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 403 `{ error: { message: string } }`

### 2.2 Get User by Id
- GET `/api/user/{id}`
- Path params: `{ id: string }`
- Responses:
  - 200 `{ data: { id: string } }`
  - 401 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 403 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 404 `{ error: { message: "User not found" } }`

## 3. AI Chat

### 3.1 Send Chat Message
- POST `/api/chat`
- Request body (Zod):
```ts
{
  userId: string(min:1),
  message: string(min:1),
}
```
- Responses:
  - 200 `{ data: { content: string, timestamp: string } }`
  - 401 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 403 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 500 `{ error: { message: "AI processing failed" } }`

### Notes
- AI responses are generated in Russian language
- Response time may vary based on AI model load (typically < 3 seconds)
- All conversations are stateless (no context preservation between messages)

## Notes
- All responses are JSON.
- Errors follow `{ error: { message, code? } }`.
- On future DB integration, user payloads may expand; this spec will be updated first.

Commit message:

docs(all): unify profile statuses to collecting/complete; remove chat registrationComplete; update FEAT-0003 mapping; add registration flow diagram; normalization rules; fix bootstrap path; English-only cleanup

docs/API_SPEC.md, after:

# Fit Coach API Spec (MVP)

This spec is the canonical definition of the MVP API. Code must match this document.

Base URL: `/`

## Security
- Protected routes: all under `/api/*` require header `X-Api-Key: <secret>`.
- Public routes: `/health`, `/docs`, `/docs/*`.
- Error codes:
  - 401 Unauthorized — header `X-Api-Key` is missing
  - 403 Forbidden — invalid `X-Api-Key`

Swagger (OpenAPI) additions:
```yaml
components:
  securitySchemes:
    ApiKeyAuth:
      type: apiKey
      in: header
      name: X-Api-Key
```
Protected endpoints should declare:
```yaml
security:
  - ApiKeyAuth: []
```

## 1. Health
- GET `/health`
- Response 200: `{ "status": "ok" }`

## 2. Users

### 2.1 Create/Upsert User
- x-feature: FEAT-0001
- POST `/api/user`
- Request body (Zod):
```ts
{
  provider: string(min:1),
  providerUserId: string(min:1),
  username?: string,
  firstName?: string,
  lastName?: string,
  languageCode?: string,
}
```
- Responses:
  - 200 `{ data: { id: string } }`
  - 400 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 401 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 403 `{ error: { message: string } }`

### 2.2 Get User by Id
- x-feature: FEAT-0002
- GET `/api/user/{id}`
- Path params: `{ id: string }`
- Responses:
  - 200 `{ data: { id: string } }`
  - 401 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 403 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 404 `{ error: { message: "User not found" } }`

## 3. AI Chat

### 3.1 Send Chat Message
- x-feature: FEAT-0003
- POST `/api/chat`
- Request body (Zod):
```ts
{
  userId: string(min:1),
  message: string(min:1),
}
```
- Responses:
  - 200 `{ data: { content: string, timestamp: string } }`
  - 401 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 403 `{ error: { message: string } }`
  - 404 `{ error: { message: "User not found" } }`
  - 500 `{ error: { message: "Processing failed" } }`

  Notes:
  - Profile completion status is internal to the server. Clients receive only user-facing `content` and a `timestamp`.

### Notes
- Response time may vary based on AI model load (typically < 3 seconds)
- All conversations are stateless (no context preservation between messages)

## Notes
- All responses are JSON.
- Errors follow `{ error: { message, code? } }`.
- On future DB integration, user payloads may expand; this spec will be updated first.
